android/android-grpc/docs/README.md, before:

Emulator over gRPC  Examples
============================

Most of the samples have moved over to the public container repository that you can find [here](https://github.com/google/android-emulator-container-scripts).

The samples are well documented and run against the publicly released emulator binaries.

# Controlling the emulator with Python

In the python directory you will find a few examples. The examples require Python3, as Python2 is now [deprecated](https://www.python.org/doc/sunset-python-2/). You can build the examples by running:

```sh
  $ make deps
```

Next you need to launch an emulator with the gRPC port enabled on port 8554:

```sh
  $ $AOSP/external/qemu/objs/emulator @my_avd -grpc 8554 [..other options...]
```

Now you can run any of the samples under the sample directory as follows:

```sh
  $ python3 -m sample.name_of_sample
```

Where name of sample can be any of the python modules in the sample directory (`ls -1 sample/*.py`). For example:

```sh
  $ python3 -m sample.keystrokes
```

### Screenshot

The screenshot example requires tkInter. You can find details on installing tkInter [here](https://tkdocs.com/tutorial/install.html).

Or try:
- `sudo apt-get install python3-tk` on linux
- `brew install python3` on macos (has tkinter)

Commit message:

[gRPC] Install pillow as part of the samples
You need PIL in order to run python -m sample.screenshot. We now install
the pillow package as part of the tests/makefile.

Change-Id: I0d607a65f909ca4153d7a750b8132b64b12c5d29

android/android-grpc/docs/README.md, after:

Emulator over gRPC  Examples
============================

Most of the samples have moved over to the public container repository that you can find [here](https://github.com/google/android-emulator-container-scripts).

The samples are well documented and run against the publicly released emulator binaries.

# Controlling the emulator with Python

In the python directory you will find a few examples. The examples require Python3, as Python2 is now [deprecated](https://www.python.org/doc/sunset-python-2/). You can build the examples by running:

```sh
  $ make deps
```

**Note:** This installs the pillow package. If you see failures you might need
to install tkInter. (See details in the Screenshot section).

Next you need to launch an emulator with the gRPC port enabled on port 8554:

```sh
  $ $AOSP/external/qemu/objs/emulator @my_avd -grpc 8554 [..other options...]
```

Now you can run any of the samples under the sample directory as follows:

```sh
  $ python3 -m sample.name_of_sample
```

Where name of sample can be any of the python modules in the sample directory (`ls -1 sample/*.py`). For example:

```sh
  $ python3 -m sample.keystrokes
```

### Screenshot

The screenshot example requires tkInter. You can find details on installing tkInter [here](https://tkdocs.com/tutorial/install.html).

Or try:
- `sudo apt-get install python3-tk` on linux
- `brew install python3` on macos (has tkinter)
