JavaScript WebRTC samples
=========================

This document descibes how to run the gRPC/WebRTC example. This sample expects the emulator to be running in a server like environment:

- There is a Webserver hosting the HTML/JS
- There is a [gRPC web proxy](https://grpc.io/blog/state-of-grpc-web/)
- The udp ports required for WebRTC are open, or a turn service is configured.

These services should be accessible for the browsers that want to interact with the emulator. For example a publicly visible GCE/AWS server should work fine.

This sample is based on ReactJS and provides the following set of components:

- EmulatorWebrtcView: A view on the emulator that is using WebRTC. It will use the Jsep protocol over gRPC to establish the video streams. This is the preferred method to view the emulator, as it will provide the best experience.
- EmulatorPngView:  A view on the emulator that is generated by requesting a screenshot at a fixed interval. Beware that these screenshots can arrive out of order, so the user experience could be a little odd at times. *Note: This is very expensive, and is merely here to showcase how you could make an interactive UI using gRPC.*
- EmulatorFallbackView: A View that will use WebRTC if possible, and otherwise will revert to using the png view.

You will likely need to modify `App.js` and `index.html` to suit your needs.

# Configure the emulator

Support for WebRTC is officially only available on linux releases. WebRTC support will be activated if the emulator is launched with the `-grpc <port>` flag. The current demos expect the gRPC endpoint to be available at `localhost:5556`. This port only needs to be accessible by the gRPC proxy that is being used. There is no need for this port to be publicly visible.

### Do I need TURN?

The most important thing to is to figure out if you need a [Turn Server](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Traversal_Using_Relays_around_NAT). **You usually only need this if your server running the emulator is behind a firewall, and not publicly accessible.** Most of the time there is no need for a turn server.

If for example you are running the emulator in a private Google GCE project, you will need to make use of a turn server. You can take the following steps to enable turn:

1. Enable a turn service. There are many services you could use. A quick [Google search](https://www.google.com/search?q=webrtc+turn+server+cloud+providers) will provide a series of provides. If you are internal at google you could use the [GCE turn api](http://go/turnaas).
2. Launch the emulator with the `-turncfg` flag.
   This will inform the videobridge to execute the given command for every new incoming connection to obtain the JSON turn configuration that will be used.

    This command must do the following:

    - Produce a result on stdout.
    - Produce a result within 1000 ms.
    - Produce a valid [JSON RTCConfiguration object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RTCPeerConnection/RTCPeerConnection).
    - That contain at least an "iceServers" array.
    - The exit value should be 0 on success

    For example:

    ```sh
    emulator -grpc 5556 -turncfg "curl -s -X POST https://networktraversal.googleapis.com/v1alpha/iceconfig?key=MySec"
    ```

# Configuring the web server

## As a Developer

As a developer you will make use of the gRPC go proxy and use node.js to serve the react app.  You can launch the develop environment with:

```sh
  $ make deps && make develop
```

This should open up a browser, and detect any change made to the webpages and JavaScript sources.

To stop the service:

```sh
  $ make stop
```

## In production

A production version based on [docker compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) can be created as follows:

```sh
 $ make build-release
```

This will create two docker containers that work together to make the emulator accessible on the web. The two containers are:

- Nginx container with the HTML and compiled JavaScript
- Envoy proxy that forwards calls to the emulator.

The containers are configured in a compose file that binds to port 80 and 443. The envoy container will offer the self signed certs found in docker/certs.

You can start the service as follows:

```sh
 $ make run-release
```

Now point your browser to http://localhost.